Awesome — you’re done for today. ✅

You now have a Snort fast alert parser that’s:

passing IPv4 + IPv6 tests

handling optional ports cleanly (ICMP/no-port ready)

producing a SIEM-friendly alert object (to_dict(), to_json())

If you want one clean “stop point” note for tomorrow, here it is:

Next session options

Add a parse_fast_stream(stdin) mode (so Snort can pipe alerts straight into your app)

Add a small JSONL writer (alerts.jsonl) for ELK/Splunk ingestion

Add a couple “real world noise” tests (extra spaces, unusual messages, malformed lines)

Sleep easy — this is solid progress.

📊 Current Status

At this stage, the project provides:

A production-quality Snort fast alert parser

Comprehensive automated tests

A clean, scalable project structure

SIEM-ready alert normalization

The lab is ready for:

Live Snort log ingestion

JSONL output for ELK or Splunk

Streaming or pipeline integration

🔜 Future Enhancements

Potential next steps:

Install and run Snort for live alert generation

Stream alerts via stdin or sockets

Write alerts to JSONL for SIEM ingestion

Implement alert deduplication or correlation

Integrate with ELK, Splunk, or SOAR platforms

📚 Notes

This project emphasizes SOC realism, test-driven development, and defensive engineering practices over quick parsing hacks.
The design mirrors how production detection pipelines are built and hardened in real SOC environments.



SOC Detection Lab — Daily Progress Log

Project: SOC Detection Lab
Focus: Snort fast alert parsing, test-driven development, SOC-style normalization
Status: Parser complete, tests passing, environment stabilized

1. Project Initialization & Folder Structure

I created a new project directory named soc-detection-lab to serve as the foundation for a SOC-style detection and alert parsing environment.

The project was organized using a standard Python application layout to support scalability, testing, and documentation.

Top-Level Structure

soc-detection-lab/

src/ — application source code

tests/ — automated test suite

venv/ — isolated Python virtual environment

.pytest_cache/ — pytest runtime cache

pytest.ini — pytest configuration file

This structure separates application logic from tests and environment artifacts, following professional Python and SOC tooling conventions.

2. Python Virtual Environment Setup

A Python virtual environment (venv) was created and activated to ensure:

Dependency isolation

Reproducible testing

Clean separation from system Python

All development and testing was performed inside this virtual environment.

3. Snort Fast Alert Parser Development
Parser File Creation

I created a parser module located at:

src/parsers/snort_fast.py


This file contains all logic related to parsing Snort “fast” alert format output.

Implemented Capabilities

The parser supports:

Snort fast alert format parsing

IPv4 and IPv6 addresses

TCP, UDP, and ICMP protocols

Optional ports (handles ICMP / no-port alerts correctly)

Priority → SOC severity normalization

Structured alert output using a frozen dataclass

JSON and dictionary serialization for SIEM ingestion

Key Components Implemented

parse_fast_line() — parses a single Snort fast alert line

parse_fast_file() — generator for streaming alert files

priority_to_severity() — normalizes Snort priority into SOC-style severity

SnortFastAlert dataclass — immutable alert object with to_dict() and to_json()

4. Regex Hardening & Real-World Edge Cases

The Snort fast alert regex was progressively hardened to handle real SOC conditions:

Converted regex to an rf"""...""" f-string to allow variable interpolation

Implemented combined IPv4 / IPv6 matching

Escaped literal braces correctly for f-strings

Made source and destination ports optional

Ensured backward compatibility with IPv4-only alerts

This ensured the parser does not fail on:

IPv6 traffic

ICMP alerts

Missing port information

Variations in alert content

5. Test-Driven Development (pytest)
Test Directory

A dedicated test directory was created:

tests/


Contents include:

test_snort_fast_parser.py — comprehensive unit tests

__pycache__/ — Python bytecode cache

.pytest_cache/ — pytest runtime metadata

Tests Implemented

The test suite validates:

Priority → severity mapping

Successful parsing of standard TCP alerts

Parsing of UDP alerts

Parsing of ICMP alerts (no ports)

Parsing of IPv6 alerts

Graceful handling of blank or malformed lines

All tests are designed to reflect real SOC alert scenarios, not synthetic edge cases.

6. Pytest Configuration

A pytest.ini file was created at the project root to ensure:

The project root is added to PYTHONPATH

The src/ directory is importable during tests

Tests are always discovered under tests/

This removed the need to manually set environment variables when running pytest.

7. Test Results

Final test execution:

pytest -q


Result:

5 passed in 0.02s


All tests passed successfully, confirming:

Parser correctness

IPv4 and IPv6 compatibility

Optional port handling

Stable alert object creation

8. Current State Summary

At the end of today’s work:

The SOC Detection Lab folder is fully structured

The Snort fast alert parser is complete and hardened

The test suite is comprehensive and passing

The environment is stable and reproducible

The project is ready for:

Real Snort log ingestion

JSON output to ELK / Splunk

Streaming or pipeline integration

9. Natural Next Steps (Not Implemented Yet)

Potential follow-up work includes:

Streaming alerts from stdin or sockets

Writing alerts to JSONL for SIEM ingestion

Adding alert deduplication or correlation

Installing Snort and validating against real logs

Integrating with ELK, Splunk, or SOAR tooling












































































